Title: Dashboard2Code: Evaluating Multimodal Models on Reconstructing Interactive Dashboards

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04727v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 03:36:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# Dashboard2Code: Evaluating Multimodal Models on Reconstructing Interactive Dashboards 

Tianhao Niu * Ziyu Han * Qiguang Chen Shiqi Zhou Baocai Shan Hengjie Fang Qingfu Zhu Wanxiang Che †

Research Center for Social Computing and Interactive Robotics Harbin Institute of Technology, China 

{thniu,zyhan,car}@ir.hit.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Automatic data visualization generation has advanced rapidly with multi-modal large lan-guage models, yet existing efforts largely focus on static charts and overlook the interactive dashboards commonly used for real-world data exploration. We introduce Dashboard2Code, a novel task that requires a model to proac-tively explore an interactive dashboard, acquire and integrate feedback from its own interac-tions (e.g., clicking and filtering), and generate code that reproduces the target dashboard. To support comprehensive evaluation, we present DashboardMimic, the first Plotly+Dash bench-mark for Dashboard2Code, comprising 180 carefully designed and manually verified dash-board–code pairs spanning three difficulty lev-els and covering eight common real-world in-teraction patterns. We further propose an auto-mated evaluation framework tailored to dash-boards that combines code semantic analysis with dynamic interaction-based testing to as-sess visual and interaction consistency, show-ing strong agreement with human judgments. Experiments across a range of open- and closed-source multi-modal models reveal that even the strongest systems struggle on high-complexity dashboards and that a substantial performance gap remains between open-source and closed-source models on the Dashboard2Code task. 

> 1

1 Introduction 

Automatic data visualization understanding and generation are important tasks in artificial intelli-gence. With the rapid development of multi-modal large language models, tasks for understanding data visualizations (e.g., chart question answering (Masry et al., 2022, 2025), chart summarization (Choi et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024), chart pars-ing (Xu et al., 2025b)) and tasks for generating 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Corresponding author.  

> 1

Code and data …            

> plt .bar (x,y,color =“blue” )
> …
> plt .xlabel (xLabel )
> plt .ylabel (ylabel )
> …
> <html lang ="en '>
> <title> …</title>
> <style>
> …
> </style>
> …
> data =[...]
> df =pd .DataFrame (data )
> app =dash .Dash (__name__ )
> app .layout =[...]
> …
> @app .callback ()
> def update_metrics (…):
> …
> if __name__ == '__main__’ :
> app .run_server ()
> Screenshot
> DOM
> (Optional)
> Action (e.g.
> Click, Drag)
> (a) Chart2Code
> (b) Video2Code
> (c) Dashboard2Code
> VLM
> VLM

Figure 1: Comparison of Dashboard2Code task with existing tasks. Dashboard2Code requires the model to proactively explore a dashboard, collect feedback during exploration, and integrate this feedback with the interaction history to generate code that faithfully reproduces both the visual appearance and interaction logic of the target dashboard. 

visualizations (e.g., text-to-chart (Rahman et al., 2025; Ni et al., 2025) and chart-to-code (Yang et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2025a)) show strong results. However, these tasks mainly focus on understanding and gen-erating static visualizations. In practical scenarios, datasets are often large and structurally complex, making interactive dashboards a common form of visualization for in-depth exploration. As interac-tive interfaces, dashboards enable users to uncover more complex data patterns and logical relations through actions such as clicking and filtering. With the rapid development of multi-modal large language models (Wang et al., 2025a; OpenAI et al., 2024; Team et al., 2025), several important research 

> arXiv:2607.04727v1 [cs.SE] 6 Jul 2026

tasks have emerged on automating interactive user interfaces. One line of research systematically evaluates multi-modal GUI agents on perception, action, and reasoning over interactive interfaces. For instance, OS-World (Xie et al., 2024) introduces a bench-mark that evaluates multi-modal agents in real op-erating system environments on open-ended com-puter tasks involving diverse applications, inter-faces, and workflows. In the data visualization do-main, DashboardQA (Kartha et al., 2025) presents the dashboard question answering benchmark that assesses a GUI agent’s ability to interact with a dashboard in response to a given question and re-turn the correct final answer. However, these re-search tasks typically provide explicit goal instruc-tions, making it difficult to assess whether GUI Agents can actively fully explore, understand, and reason over dynamic interactive interfaces and then recreate it. Another line of research focuses on reconstruct-ing dynamic interfaces and their interaction logic from trajectories or videos through code. For in-stance, Interaction2Code evaluates whether multi-modal large language models can reconstruct code from a user interaction sequence (Xiao et al., 2025). IWR-Bench (Chen et al., 2025) evaluates whether multi-modal large language models can recover an interactive web page from a user interaction video and generate the corresponding code. These studies extend visualization understanding toward code generation for dynamic interactive interfaces. However, these tasks still rely on human-annotated interaction trajectories for evaluation. Such annota-tions increase cost and do not capture the model’s ability to proactively explore, integrate, and use diverse external feedback obtained during its own exploration. In addition, these tasks are mainly lim-ited to general web pages and do not consider the interaction logic specific to interactive dashboards. Furthermore, their evaluation metrics are generic and are not tailored for dashboards. In light of these observations, we introduce the Dashboard2Code task. Unlike previous settings that rely on static snapshots (Yang et al., 2025; Si et al., 2025) or annotated interaction image traces to generate code (Chen et al., 2025; Xiao et al., 2025) and thus leave models in a passive role, Dashboard2Code requires the model to proactively explore a dashboard, collect feedback during ex-ploration, and integrate this feedback with the interaction history to generate code that faithfully reproduces both the visual appearance and interac-tion logic of the target dashboard. This formulation positions the task as an active interaction problem: the model must navigate the interface, interpret dynamic feedback, and reason over a sequence of interactions to make proper action decisions or re-cover the underlying implementation. As a result, Dashboard2Code presents a stronger end -to - end challenge for multi-modal models. To comprehensively evaluate the Dash-board2Code task, we introduce DashboardMimic, the first Plotly+Dash-based benchmark that covers diverse visualization types and interaction logic. It contains 180 carefully designed dashboard–code pairs across three difficulty levels and includes eight common real-world dashboard interaction patterns, with all annotations manually verified. We further propose an automated evaluation framework tailored to Dashboard2Code, which combines code semantic evaluation and dynamic interaction evaluation to measure interaction-logic consistency and visual consistency, and shows strong agreement with human judgments (Pearson correlation = 0.78). We evaluate a range of multi-modal models, in-cluding both open- and closed-source systems. The strongest model, Gemini 3 Pro, achieves 79.4, but it reaches only 64.2 on Complexity L3, which bet-ter reflects real-world complexity. Furthermore, our results reveal a substantial performance gap between open-source and closed-source models on the Dashboard2Code task. Our contributions are as follows: • We propose the novel Dashboard2Code task, which requires the model to proactively ex-plore a dashboard, obtain feedback, and inte-grate this feedback with the interaction history to generate code that reproduces the target dashboard. • We construct a Plotly+Dash based Dash-board2Code benchmark DashboardMimic, which provides broad coverage of dashboard visualization types and interaction logic. 2.• We propose an automated, multi-aspect eval-uation framework for Dashboard2Code and validate its consistency with human evalua-tion.     

> 2We compare our benchmark with existing benchmarks in the appendix A.2. We discuss more related works in ap-pendix A.1 (a) Collecting Real-world
> dashboard
> (b) Creating taxonomy (c) LLM-Based Data Augmentation (d)-Quality Assurance
> Dash Gallery
> Example Index
> Data
> Filtering
> Real Dataset
> Real Dataset
> Summarize
> 20 Vis Types 8 Interact logic
> Sampled
> Vis Types
> Sampled
> Interact logic
> Sampled
> Domain
> Augmented Dataset
> Dashboard2Code Pair
> Data
> Filtering
> Human
> Recheck

Final Dataset 

> Only from Dash Example Index

Figure 2: Benchmark construction pipeline. 

2 Task Formulation 

In contrast to chart-to-code and video-to-code set-tings, Dashboard2Code requires the GUI agent to actively interact with the target dashboard at run-time and infer its structure, component semantics, and interaction logic from iterative feedback. The goal of the task is to generate code that reproduces the dashboard with high fidelity in both functional behavior and visual appearance. Formally, given a target dashboard D and its ini-tial view V0 = Vinitial , the agent interacts with the environment for a variable number of steps. At step 

t = 1 , 2, . . . , the agent receives feedback ot−1 and selects an action at ∈ S from an action space S

(e.g., click, hover, scroll, drag), or chooses a special STOP action to terminate interaction. After execut-ing at, the environment returns new feedback 

ot = Feedback( D, a 1: t), (1) where the feedback can take two forms: (i) visual-only feedback ot = Vt, or (ii) visual+DOM feed-back ot = ( Vt, G t), with Gt denoting the DOM tree (or an equivalent structured UI representation) at step t. In both cases, Vt is the rendered view after applying actions a1: t:

Vt = Render( D, a 1: t). (2) When DOM feedback is available, Gt denotes the corresponding DOM tree (or an equivalent struc-tured UI representation) at step t, obtained after executing the same action history: 

Gt = DOM( D, a 1: t). (3) The agent terminates at time τ when it selects STOP and outputs code C, which is used to con-struct a reproduced dashboard ˆD = Build( C). The objective is to maximize the end-to-end reproduc-tion quality: 

C∗ = arg max  

> C

M D, Build( C), (4) Notably, the goal of this task is to produce code that reproduces the target dashboard and does not enforce a strict two-stage “explore → generate” pipeline. For instance, the model may interleave exploration and code generation, continuously inte-grating its interaction history and feedback to draft and iteratively refine the code throughout the inter-action process. The already drafted code may be a replacement for some screenshot history. 

3 Benchmark Construction 

3.1 Overview 

To comprehensively evaluate models for dy-namic dashboard recreation, we construct Dash-boardMimic benchmark based on the Python Plotly+Dash framework. The benchmark consists of 58 carefully curated real-world dashboard-code pairs and 122 high-quality synthetic dashboards en-hanced by large language models. It covers 20 com-mon visualization types and 8 callback-logic pat-terns spanning multiple levels of interaction com-plexity. 

3.2 Collecting and Filtering Real-world Data 

We first collect a large set of dashboard-code pairs from the open-source community site 

dash-example-index.herokuapp , which pro-vides minimal examples covering diverse Dash chart types and interaction logic. To ensure data quality, we apply the filtering principle defined in appendix A.3.1. After filtering, we retain 58 high-quality real-world dashboards as seed data. In addition, we select 50 dashboards from 

DashGallery to summarize visualization types, in-teraction logic and interactive components in dash-boards along with the 58 collected seed data. 3

3.3 Creating Taxonomy of Interaction Logic 

Interaction logic is a key property of dashboards. Based on the callback-topology graphs derived from 108 real-world dashboard examples, we cat-egorize callback logic into three difficulty levels with eight subtypes. Detailed definitions are shown in the appendix A.3.2. And dashboard examples of each subtype are shown in the appendix A.8. 

3.4 LLM-Based Data Augmentation 

To further enrich interaction logic and visualiza-tion types, increase domain diversity, scale up the benchmark, we use LLMs to augment the bench-mark based on the taxonomy in §3.3, together with the visualization types and interaction components observed from 108 real-world dashboards. We develop a semi-random sampling-then-generating pipeline that increases benchmark di-versity while keeping dashboards semantically and functionally coherent. The pipeline first samples a high-level specification, including a domain, an interaction-complexity level in §3.3, a UI style (na-tive vs. Bootstrap), and candidate types of UI com-ponents (3 basic and 4 advanced) and visualiza-tion types (5 in total). In the generation stage, an LLM is conditioned on this specification to write a grounded user story and then implement the dash-board in Plotly+Dash; Notably, the LLM is allowed to select an appropriate subset of the sampled com-ponents and visualization types rather than being forced to use all of them. Prompt details are shown in appendix A.3.3. We use multiple state-of-the-art LLM families (Gemini, GPT, and Claude) as generators. Employ-ing multiple generators helps mitigate potential bias introduced by any single model. However, LLM-based synthesis is inherently imperfect. We therefore initially generate around 500 samples in total and then do the quality control in the next selection.   

> 3We do not directly include DashGallery data in our benchmark as many dashboards there rely heavily on external data sources and additional libraries, which can unfairly lower code-generation scores when the required dependencies or domain knowledge are missing.

3.5 Quality Assurance 

This section outlines the rigorous quality assurance protocols employed to guarantee the high standard of dashboard-code pairs. 

Data filtering: We manually filter the synthetic dashboards according to the criteria defined in the appendix, retaining only samples that satisfy all re-quirements. After this selection process, we obtain 122 synthetic dashboards, which we merge with 58 real-world seed examples to form a benchmark of 180 dashboard–code pairs. 

Human recheck: As an additional quality-control step, two annotators independently review all 180 dashboard–code pairs to verify compliance with the same criteria defined in the appendix. We further discuss the Data Contamination miti-gation in appendix A.3.5. 

3.6 Benchmark Statistics 

The DashboardMimic benchmark contains 180 Plotly+Dash dashboard–code pairs. Among them, 58 are collected from real-world dash-example-index and 122 are synthesized with LLMs. All sam-ples undergo strict manual screening and filtering to ensure data quality. We show more statistics re-lated to UI component, Visualization type diversity and Interaction logic diversity in appendix A.3.6. At this stage, we limit Dashboard2Code to Plotly+Dash. This is a deliberate choice. Plotly is an open-source Python library for building inter-active charts, and Dash is an open-source Python framework for building data apps with common dashboard parts such as charts, tables, controls, and callback-based interactions. Both are released under the MIT license, which makes our bench-mark easier to reproduce and extend. In addition, since both Plotly and Dash use Python, this setting helps reduce the effect of weaker code generation in other programming languages on the final evalua-tion. We therefore use Plotly+Dash as a controlled and practical first step for studying multi-modal agents on dashboard programming. Although this setting does not cover all dashboard frameworks, we hope DashboardMimic can provide a solid start-ing point for future work on more frameworks. 4

> 4We discuss more about other dashboard frameworks in appendix A.3.7

4 Evaluation Framework 

4.1 Overview 

This section describes our evaluation framework for the Dashboard2Code task. The framework is fully automated and combines Code Semantics Evalua-tion with Dynamic Interaction Evaluation . Specif-ically, Code Semantics Evaluation compares the ground-truth code (GT) and the generated code (G EN ) via static properties without executing ei-ther program. The Dynamic Interaction Evaluation 

is inspired by IWR-B ENCH : a strong GUI agent executes a set of predefined tasks on the generated dashboard and compares outcomes with those on the reference dashboard. In contrast to prior settings, our dynamic eval-uation metrics are designed to better reflect the properties of Dashboard2Code. (1) Dashboards are designed for interactive data visualization. There-fore, evaluation should jointly assess both visual fidelity —covering visualization type, style, and data—and interaction-logic correctness . (2) In Plotly+Dash dashboards, the front-end exposes structured attribute dictionaries for each visualiza-tion object (e.g., data, style, text, and visualization type). Comparing these attribute dictionaries pro-vides a low-cost and less subjective alternative to using LLMs as judges. Empirically, this metric correlates closely with human judgments and per-forms comparably to LLM-as-judge in evaluating visual consistency. Detailed results are provided in the appendix A.4. Overall, the final metric produced by our frame-work shows strong agreement with human evalu-ation on the Dashboard2Code task (Pearson cor-relation = 0 .78 ). Details of metric validation and quality control are provided in the appendix. 

4.2 Code Semantic Evaluation 

Code Semantics Evaluation compares the static properties of the ground-truth code ( GT ) and the generated code ( Gen ) without involving any run-time interaction. It includes two metrics. (1) Key Component Coverage (F1): We extract compo-nent class names from app.layout in both GT and 

Gen , and compute an F1 score to measure whether the model selects the correct component types. (2) LLM-Semantic-Eval: We use Gemini-3-Flash to score the semantic consistency between GT and 

Gen code. In the prompt, we instruct Gemini-3-Flash to focus on the equivalence of the intended behavior and logic rather than low-level implemen-tation details. The evaluation prompt is shown in the appendix A.4.7. 

4.3 Dynamic Interaction Evaluation 4.3.1 Overall Workflow 

Dynamic Interaction Evaluation aims to directly assess the consistency between the generated dash-board and the reference dashboard in both visual appearance and interactive behavior . This comple-ments code-semantics evaluation by reducing cases where different implementations lead to the same rendered results. Inspired by IWR-B ENCH , we annotate a set of test tasks for each dashboard in our bench-mark (e.g., “Click the ‘Update’ button” or “Select 

OptionA in the dropdown”). We introduce an auto-mated evaluation agent based on an advanced multi-modal LLM. For each task, the agent receives the DOM tree and the task instruction, and executes the task on both the reference and generated dash-boards from their initial states. After execution, we score the outcomes using the metrics defined in §4.3.3. The dashboard-level score is computed as the average over all its tasks. If the generated dashboard raises an error at any step of a task (e.g., an expected target element is missing), we assign a score of 0 to that task. We also define the Task Execution Rate metric, which refers to the proportion of tasks successfully executed by the evaluation agent across the entire benchmark, relative to the total number of tasks. 

4.3.2 Evaluation Task Annotation 

To evaluate the consistency of interactive behavior, we manually annotate a set of deterministic test tasks for each dashboard. Further annotation prin-ciples, quality assurance details and examples are in the appendix A.4.4. 

4.3.3 Evaluation Metric Figure Similarity. After each task is executed, we extract the internal Plotly figure JSON specifica-tions from the frontend for both the generated dash-board and the reference dashboard, and perform a fine-grained comparison along four dimensions Style, Data, Type and Text and do weighted average as final score. Details are in the appendix A.4.5. In particular, Figure Similarity correlates closely with human judgments as an LLM-judge-free metric, as shown in the appendix A.4.2. 

LLM-Visual-Eval. After each task is executed, we use G EMINI -3-F LASH to score the visual simi-larity between the generated dashboard screenshot and the reference dashboard screenshot. The full prompt is provided in the appendix A.4.7. 

LLM-Task-Behavior-Eval. For each task, we feed G EMINI -3-F LASH four screenshots: the ref-erence dashboard before execution and after exe-cution, and the generated dashboard before execu-tion and after execution. G EMINI -3-F LASH is in-structed to focus on whether the responses caused by the interaction are consistent across the two dashboards, and outputs a behavior-consistency score. The full prompt is provided in the ap-pendix A.4.7. 

4.4 Final Evaluation Metric 

The final evaluation score is a weighted combina-tion of the above metrics. 

Score = 0 .1 KCC + 0 .3 LLM sem + 0 .2 FigSim + 0 .2 LLM vis + 0 .2 LLM beh .

(5) This aggregated score achieves a Pearson cor-relation of 0.78 with human evaluation. We further validate the robustness of LLM-as-judge choice. Details of metric validation, quality con-trol and weight determination are provided in the appendix A.4. In our evaluation, if the generated code fails to execute, the corresponding dashboard receives a score of 0. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

In this section, we detail the implementation of the Dashboard2Code interactive environment, the agent’s interaction mechanism and context-management strategy, and the base model configu-rations evaluated in our experiments. 

5.1.1 Interaction Environment 

To simulate realistic web interactions, we establish a lightweight environment using Selenium to drive Google Chrome, with the viewport resolution fixed at 1920 × 1080 for consistent visual observations. Beyond visual feedback, the environment can op-tionally provide the DOM tree, which undergoes a strict pruning and abstraction strategy to opti-mize context length. We adopt an MM-React-style framework where the model generates its reasoning and executes actions—such as standard keyboard and mouse operations—within the environment. Full implementation details are provided in the Ap-pendix A.5.1. 

5.1.2 Baseline Models 

We selected the most advanced proprietary and open-weight multimodal models (LMMs) for evaluation: For Proprietary Models, we evalu-ate OpenAI’s GPT-5.1 (OpenAI et al., 2024), Google’s Gemini 3 Pro , and Anthropic’s 

Claude-Sonnet-4.5 . For Open-weight models, we select the Qwen3-VL (Bai et al., 2025) series (including the 30B-A3B and 8B versions) and the 

InternVL3.5-8B (Wang et al., 2025a). 

5.1.3 Evaluation Setup 

We use an MM-React-style (Yang et al., 2023) framework for evaluation. At each step, the multi-modal model receives the current dashboard screen-shot, optional DOM tree, historical screenshots, and actions as input. The model outputs its rea-soning and selects an action from its action space. We further use a resolution compression strategy to reduce overhead. Detailed evaluation setup and examples is shown in the appendix A.5.2. 

5.2 Main Results 

Table 1 presents the results of Dashboard2Code task in DashboardMimic benchmark. We have the following observations. 

Dashboard2Code is a challenging task for all models. As shown in the results from Table 1, the Dashboard2Code task presents a significant challenge for all types of models. Even the best-performing proprietary model, such as Gemini 3 Pro, still has substantial room for improvement. In particular, its performance on the more complex Level 3 tasks, which involve advanced callback logic, is only 64.2 points, highlighting the difficulty that even the strongest current models face when tasked with generating interactive code in scenarios that approach real-world complexity. Moreover, we observe that performance drops dramatically when DOM information is excluded, indicating that models still have significant limitations in GUI visual grounding on dashboards. 

Large Performance Gap between Proprietary and Open-Source Models. There is a notable performance gap between proprietary and open-source models. Proprietary models, such as Gem-ini 3 Pro and GPT-5.1, consistently outperform the current best open-source multimodal models, such as Qwen3-VL and InternVL3.5. This disparity is especially pronounced when DOM support is un-available, with open-source models showing a sig-Model Code Exec. Task Exec. Comp. Cov. LLM Sem. Fig Sim LLM Vis. LLM Behav. Total                                                                                                 

> Closed-source (with DOM)
> Gemini 3 Pro 97.8 94.2 91.6 81.9 80.9 70.3 77.1 79.4 GPT-5.1 82.2 76.9 73.4 61.4 61.8 62.0 50.9 60.7 Claude Sonnet 4.5 78.9 71.2 69.3 48.3 53.5 50.6 41.2 50.5
> Closed-source (w/o DOM)
> Gemini 3 Pro 99.4 93.2 90.1 74.1 78.0 72.1 69.6 75.2 GPT-5.1 78.3 63.0 68.7 53.0 51.0 49.2 45.6 51.9 Claude Sonnet 4.5 83.3 59.8 70.3 42.9 48.6 43.0 30.2 44.3
> Open-source (with DOM)
> Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Instruct 63.3 12.8 50.5 30.8 29.1 12.4 12.5 25.1 InternVL3.5-8B 5.6 1.1 4.8 1.7 2.8 1.1 1.1 2.0 Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct 2.8 1.8 1.9 1.2 1.4 0.9 0.8 1.2
> Open-source (w/o DOM)
> Qwen3-VL-30B-A3B-Instruct 60.0 12.2 46.5 27.8 28.1 12.2 12.2 23.5 InternVL3.5-8B 2.2 0.6 1.5 0.7 1.2 0.6 0.6 0.8 Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct 1.1 1.1 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.5

Table 1: Overall results on DashboardMimic under settings with and without DOM information.                

> Model Avg. Steps Ineff. Exp. (%) UI Expl. Ratio
> Gemini 3 Pro with DOM 3.31 2.37% 64.58 Gemini 3 Pro w/o DOM 3.90 40.15% 20.61 GPT-5.1 with DOM 4.25 4.96% 45.06 GPT-5.1 w/o DOM 7.18 56.96% 23.00

Table 2: Exploration statistics under settings with and without DOM feedback. Here, Avg. Steps denotes Avg. Exploration Steps , i.e., the average number of interac-tion steps taken on the dashboard during exploration; 

Ineff. Exp. (%) denotes Ineffective Exploration (%) ,i.e., the percentage of interactions for which no visual changes were observed in the screenshots before and af-ter the interaction; and UI Expl. Ratio denotes UI Com-ponent Exploration Ratio , i.e., the ratio of explored UI components that successfully triggered callbacks to the total number of components in the dashboard. 

nificant drop in performance, despite their strong capabilities in GUI interaction and visual reason-ing. This suggests that open-source models are still far behind proprietary models in terms of the active exploration, integration of long-context informa-tion, visual logic reasoning, and code generation required for Dashboard2Code tasks. 

5.3 Analysis 

This section conducts a detailed analysis of the model behavior and performance in Dash-board2Code task. 

5.3.1 Breakdown Analysis There Is Significant Room for Improvement in Model Exploration Performance. As shown in Table 2, even the state-of-the-art (SOTA) mod-els achieve only a 64.58% exploration ratio of interactive components in the dashboard. This highlights the substantial room for improvement Gemini3-Pro with Dom GPT5.1 with Dom    

> Model
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Score
> 84.52
> 65.47
> 84.09
> 63.29
> 70.91
> 53.76
> 87.72
> 68.02
> Visual Dimensions Comparison Across Models
> Fig-Style Fig-Text Fig-Data Fig-Type

Figure 3: Break down analysis of different visual di-mensions. 

in the model’s ability to explore and make deci-sions based on historical visual feedback within the Dashboard2Code task. Furthermore, incorporat-ing the DOM tree, as opposed to relying solely on screenshot-based exploration, significantly reduces redundant exploration and improves the complete-ness of the exploration process. 

Model Struggles to Reproduce Dashboard Vi-sual Details. We analyze the model’s perfor-mance in reproducing the visual consistency of different dimensions. As shown in Figure 3, the model performs best in reproducing the Type , fol-lowed by Style and Text , with the weakest per-formance in Data . We attribute this to the fact that the first three are frequently changing attributes in dashboards, combined with the model’s insufficient perception of fine-grained visual details. L1 L2 L3 

> Complexity Level
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Total Score
> 91.1
> 83.1
> 64.2
> 70.9
> 62.8
> 48.4
> Gemini3-Pro with Dom
> GPT5.1 with Dom

Figure 4: Break down analysis of different interaction logic complexity.         

> Exploration Agent Coding Agent Total Score
> Gemini-3-Pro Gemini-3-Pro 75.8 (+0.6) Gemini-3-Pro Claude-4.5-Sonnet 53.4 Claude-4.5-Sonnet Claude-4.5-Sonnet 49.2 (+4.9)

Table 3: Results under role-separated inference. The numbers in parentheses indicate the gain over the corre-sponding end-to-end baseline. 

Model Struggles to Reproduce Complex Interac-tion Logic. We analyze the model’s performance across different levels of callback logic complexity. As shown in Figure 4, the model’s overall perfor-mance declines significantly as the complexity of the callback logic increases. This indicates that the model still faces considerable difficulty in explor-ing and reproducing complex logical interactions. 

5.3.2 Text Perturbation Robustness Analysis Model Performance Sensitivity to Text Pertur-bation. We observed that for some samples, the target components and logic of callback functions can be directly inferred from the relationships be-tween control text, titles, and descriptive labels in the interface. To test whether the model primarily relies on these text cues instead of understanding callback semantics through the interaction process, we created a counterfactual setup: without alter-ing the layout, component types, or the semantic content of the rest of the code, we anonymized the visible text elements in the benchmark dashboards (e.g., control labels, titles) by replacing them with meaningless labels such as "Option1", "Option2", and "Title1" in the app.layout . The details of this      

> Model LLM Sem.
> Gemini 3 Pro w/o DOM 74.11 Gemini 3 Pro w/o DOM + anonymize text 54.10 Gemini 3 Pro with DOM 81.89 Gemini 3 Pro with DOM + anonymize text 60.30

Table 4: LLM Semantic scores for Gemini under differ-ent DOM and text anonymization settings. Note that we calculate all the generated code with the ground truth code regardless of the execution error in the anonymiza-tion setting which makes the metric in anonymization setting an upperbound. 

anonymization are provided in the appendix A.7. Note that we only modify the textual element in app.layout and keep all the others the same. After the process, we manually recheck each modified code to ensure that only the text in app.layout has changed. The experimental results in Table 4 show that even for state-of-the-art models, anonymiza-tion significantly reduces callback semantic repli-cation quality. This phenomenon suggests that, in some cases, the model may rely heavily on text cues for heuristic inference rather than robustly re-covering the interaction logic. Further details and examples are shown in appendix A.7. 

5.3.3 Agent Role Separation Analysis 

In our main experiments, we employ the same agent to perform both interactive exploration and code generation. However, in practical deployment, these two responsibilities may be handled by dif-ferent expert foundation models. To examine this setting, we conduct an additional experiment in which inference is decomposed into two distinct phases. In the exploration phase, an Exploration Agent interacts with the dashboard and produces an exploration trajectory, including screenshots, in-termediate reasoning, and action history. In the generation phase, a Coding Agent takes this tra-jectory as input and generates the final code. We evaluate several cross-model role configurations using Gemini 3 Pro and Claude-4.5-Sonnet. The results are reported in Table 3. As shown in Table 3, role separation leads to modest improvements over the corresponding end-to-end baselines for indi-vidual models (e.g., Claude improves from 44.3 to 49.2). Nevertheless, the strongest overall per-formance still requires a model that is simultane-ously effective at dynamic exploration and visually grounded code generation. 11.5% 3.8% 

> 11.5%
> 73.1%

Level 1 (Easy) 2.3% 

> 16.3%
> 81.4%

Level 2 (Medium) 

> 7.1%
> 1.8%
> 3.6%
> 48.2%
> 39.3%

Level 3 (Hard)   

> Type I: Execution Type II: Presentation
> Type III: Missing
> Interactive Components
> Type IV: State
> Misinterpretation
> Type V: Transformation
> Hallucination
> Type I: Execution Type II: Presentation
> Type III: Missing
> Interactive Components
> Type IV: State
> Misinterpretation
> Type V: Transformation
> Hallucination

Figure 5: Error distribution of Gemini 3 Pro in different complexity levels. 

5.3.4 Error Analysis 

To provide a comprehensive understanding of LLM limitations in the Dashboard2Code task, we con-ducted a fine-grained manual inspection of failure cases. We identify five common error types, pro-gressing from surface-level implementation to deep semantic reasoning. We show examples of each error type in appendix A.9. 

Execution dimension - Execution Failure (Syn-tax & Runtime Errors) The most fundamental failure occurs when the generated code cannot be rendered. This includes invalid syntax, hallucinated dependencies, or deprecated API calls. 

Presentation dimension - Presentation Mis-match (Styling & Layout Deviations) The code is executable and logically valid but fails to match the target’s aesthetic specifications. Examples in-cluding incorrect layout arrangements (e.g., ver-tical vs. horizontal stacking), mismatched color palettes. 

Logical dimension - Missing Interactive Compo-nents The model misses the specific interactive components in the dashboard or fails to replicate the interactive affordance of specific elements, for instance, the model failed to identify hidden con-trols during the exploration process, resulting in the inability to replicate them. 

Logical dimension - State Misinterpretation (Broken Dependency) The model identifies com-ponents but misinterprets the causal graph between inputs and outputs. For instance, treating coupled variables as independent or wiring triggers to incor-rect outputs. 

Logical dimension - Transformation Hallucina-tion The model successfully replicates the inter-action skeleton (i.e., the causal graph) but fails to reproduce the exact data or visual transformation logic. For instance, when the progress bar is moved to the right, the gold data increases, but the gener-ated dashboard data decreases. The statistical analysis results are illustrated in the Figure 5. It can be observed that in L1 and L2, the main issue with the model lies in Transfor-mation Hallucination, suggesting that the model is generally capable of understanding the causal relationships between simpler components. How-ever, it still struggles to capture more fine-grained logical changes. In contrast, for L3, the model con-tinues to face challenges in capturing dependencies between components in most cases. Additionally, an analysis of the Missing Interactive Components category revealed that the primary issue stems from the model’s inability to effectively explore interac-tive components that are not explicitly presented on the initial screenshot. 

6 Conclusion 

We propose the Dashboard2Code task, which re-quires models to explore interactive dashboards, integrate feedback, and generate code that repro-duces both visual and interaction logic. We in-troduce the DashboardMimic benchmark, the first Plotly+Dash-based Dashboard2Code benchmark covering diverse visualization types and interaction patterns. Experimental results reveal that Dash-board2Code poses a strong challenge for multi-modal models. Limitations 

Our current benchmark, DashboardMimic, is lim-ited to Plotly+Dash-based dashboards, which may not fully capture the diversity of interactive dash-board frameworks in real-world applications. Addi-tionally, the use of LLMs as judges introduces sig-nificant evaluation costs, as it requires large-scale model inference and human evaluation for valida-tion. Future work can explore expanding the bench-mark to include other popular dashboard frame-works and investigate more cost-efficient evalua-tion methods. 

Acknowledgments 

We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) via grant 62236004 and 62476073. 

References 

Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhi-fang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, and 45 others. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2511.21631. Yang Chen, Minghao Liu, Yufan Shen, Yunwen Li, Tianyuan Huang, Xinyu Fang, Tianyu Zheng, Wenx-uan Huang, Cheng Yang, Daocheng Fu, Jianbiao Mei, Rong Wu, Yunfei Zhao, Licheng Wen, Xuemeng Yang, Song Mao, Qunshu Lin, Zhi Yu, Yongliang Shen, and 2 others. 2025. Iwr-bench: Can lvlms re-construct interactive webpage from a user interaction video? Preprint , arXiv:2509.24709. Raymond Choi, Frank Burns, and Chase Lawrence. 2025. End-to-end chart summarization via vi-sual chain-of-thought in vision-language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2502.17589. Aaryaman Kartha, Ahmed Masry, Mohammed Saidul Islam, Thinh Lang, Shadikur Rahman, Ridwan Mah-bub, Mizanur Rahman, Mahir Ahmed, Md Rizwan Parvez, Enamul Hoque, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. Dash-boardqa: Benchmarking multimodal agents for ques-tion answering on interactive dashboards. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.17398. Kenton Lee, Mandar Joshi, Iulia Turc, Hexiang Hu, Fangyu Liu, Julian Eisenschlos, Urvashi Khandel-wal, Peter Shaw, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova. 2023. Pix2struct: Screenshot parsing as pretraining for visual language understanding. 

Preprint , arXiv:2210.03347. Ahmed Masry, Mohammed Saidul Islam, Mahir Ahmed, Aayush Bajaj, Firoz Kabir, Aaryaman Kartha, Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Mizanur Rahman, Shadikur Rahman, Mehrad Shahmohammadi, Megh Thakkar, Md Rizwan Parvez, Enamul Hoque, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. Chartqapro: A more diverse and challenging benchmark for chart question answering. 

Preprint , arXiv:2504.05506. Ahmed Masry, Do Xuan Long, Jia Qing Tan, Shafiq Joty, and Enamul Hoque. 2022. Chartqa: A benchmark for question answering about charts with visual and logical reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2203.10244. Yuansheng Ni, Ping Nie, Kai Zou, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. 2025. VisCoder: Fine-tuning LLMs for executable python visualization code generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 2956–2983, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tianhao Niu, Yiming Cui, Baoxin Wang, Xiao Xu, Xin Yao, Qingfu Zhu, Dayong Wu, Shijin Wang, and Wanxiang Che. 2025. Chart2Code53: A large-scale diverse and complex dataset for enhancing chart-to-code generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 15828–15844, Suzhou, China. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Alt-man, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haim-ing Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, and 262 others. 2024. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2303.08774. Wei Pang, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Xiangru Jian, Xi He, and Philip Torr. 2025. Paper2poster: Towards mul-timodal poster automation from scientific papers. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.21497. Mizanur Rahman, Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Shafiq Joty, and Enamul Hoque. 2025. Text2Vis: A chal-lenging and diverse benchmark for generating multi-modal visualizations from text. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 31849–31874, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chenglei Si, Yanzhe Zhang, Ryan Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Ruibo Liu, and Diyi Yang. 2025. Design2Code: Benchmarking multimodal code generation for au-tomated front-end engineering. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3956–3974, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiahao Tang, Henry Hengyuan Zhao, Lijian Wu, Yifei Tao, Dongxing Mao, Yang Wan, Jingru Tan, Min Zeng, Min Li, and Alex Jinpeng Wang. 2025a. From charts to code: A hierarchical benchmark for multi-modal models. Preprint , arXiv:2510.17932. Wenxin Tang, Jingyu Xiao, Wenxuan Jiang, Xi Xiao, Yuhang Wang, Xuxin Tang, Qing Li, Yuehe Ma, Jun-liang Liu, Shisong Tang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2025b. SlideCoder: Layout-aware RAG-enhanced hierarchi-cal slide generation from design. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 9015–9039, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, and 197 others. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.19786. Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, Zhaokai Wang, Zhe Chen, Hongjie Zhang, Ganlin Yang, Haomin Wang, Qi Wei, Jinhui Yin, Wenhao Li, Erfei Cui, and 56 others. 2025a. Internvl3.5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in versatility, reasoning, and effi-ciency. Preprint , arXiv:2508.18265. Xuehui Wang, Zhenyu Wu, JingJing Xie, Zichen Ding, Bowen Yang, Zehao Li, Zhaoyang Liu, Qingyun Li, Xuan Dong, Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Xiangyu Zhao, Jixuan Chen, Haodong Duan, Tianbao Xie, Chenyu Yang, Shiqian Su, Yue Yu, Yuan Huang, and 9 others. 2025b. Mmbench-gui: Hierarchical multi-platform evaluation framework for gui agents. 

Preprint , arXiv:2507.19478. Zirui Wang, Mengzhou Xia, Luxi He, Howard Chen, Yitao Liu, Richard Zhu, Kaiqu Liang, Xindi Wu, Hao-tian Liu, Sadhika Malladi, Alexis Chevalier, Sanjeev Arora, and Danqi Chen. 2024. Charxiv: Charting gaps in realistic chart understanding in multimodal llms. Preprint , arXiv:2406.18521. Chengyue Wu, Zhixuan Liang, Yixiao Ge, Qiushan Guo, Zeyu Lu, Jiahao Wang, Ying Shan, and Ping Luo. 2025. Plot2Code: A comprehensive benchmark for evaluating multi-modal large language models in code generation from scientific plots. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 3006–3028, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jingyu Xiao, Yuxuan Wan, Yintong Huo, Zixin Wang, Xinyi Xu, Wenxuan Wang, Zhiyao Xu, Yuhang Wang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2025. Interaction2code: Benchmarking mllm-based interactive webpage code generation from interactive prototyping. Preprint ,arXiv:2411.03292. Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing Hua, Zhou-jun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. 2024. OSWorld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Mingde Xu, Zhen Yang, Wenyi Hong, Lihang Pan, Xinyue Fan, Yan Wang, Xiaotao Gu, Bin Xu, and Jie Tang. 2025a. Webvia: A web-based vision-language agentic framework for interactive and verifiable ui-to-code generation. Preprint , arXiv:2511.06251. Zhengzhuo Xu, Bowen Qu, Yiyan Qi, Sinan Du, Chengjin Xu, Chun Yuan, and Jian Guo. 2025b. Chartmoe: Mixture of diversely aligned expert connector for chart understanding. Preprint ,arXiv:2409.03277. Cheng Yang, Chufan Shi, Yaxin Liu, Bo Shui, Junjie Wang, Mohan Jing, Linran XU, Xinyu Zhu, Siheng Li, Yuxiang Zhang, Gongye Liu, Xiaomei Nie, Deng Cai, and Yujiu Yang. 2025. Chartmimic: Evaluating LMM’s cross-modal reasoning capability via chart-to-code generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Ehsan Azarnasab, Faisal Ahmed, Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, and Lijuan Wang. 2023. Mm-react: Prompting chatgpt for multimodal reasoning and action. Preprint , arXiv:2303.11381. Sukmin Yun, Haokun Lin, Rusiru Thushara, Moham-mad Qazim Bhat, Yongxin Wang, Zutao Jiang, Mingkai Deng, Jinhong Wang, Tianhua Tao, Junbo Li, Haonan Li, Preslav Nakov, Timothy Baldwin, Zhengzhong Liu, Eric P. Xing, Xiaodan Liang, and Zhiqiang Shen. 2024. Web2code: A large-scale webpage-to-code dataset and evaluation framework for multimodal llms. Preprint , arXiv:2406.20098. Xuanle Zhao, Xianzhen Luo, Qi Shi, Chi Chen, Shuo Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2025. Chart-Coder: Advancing multimodal large language model for chart-to-code generation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7333–7348, Vienna, Austria. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. 

A Appendix 

A.1 Related Work Interactive GUI Agents Recent research on in-teractive GUI agents has focused on enabling AI systems to perceive and act within graphical user interfaces in a human -like manner — OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024) offers a scalable, real computer environment with diverse interactive tasks to bench-mark multi-modal agents on open -ended work-flows, DashboardQA (Kartha et al., 2025) evalu-ates agents’ ability to interact with and reason over real interactive dashboards, and MMBench -GUI (Wang et al., 2025b) provides a hierarchical, multi - platform benchmark covering interface un-derstanding, element grounding, task automation. However, these research tasks typically provide ex-plicit goal instructions, making it difficult to assess whether GUI Agents can actively fully explore, understand, and reason over dynamic interactive interfaces and then recreate it. 

Multi-modal Code generation Multi-modal code generation refers to the task where a model takes inputs from multiple modalities and ul-timately generates code. Early works such as Pix2Struct (Lee et al., 2023), Design2Code (Si et al., 2025), and Web2Code (Yun et al., 2024) focus on evaluating the capability to gen-erate code from static front - end representations. More recently, multi-modal code generation has been expanded to multiple domains, including image -to - CAD, chart -to - code (Yang et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2025a; Niu et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2025), slide - to - code (Tang et al., 2025b), and paper -to - poster (Pang et al., 2025) generation. Despite significant progress, these tasks primar-ily concentrate on static inputs and overlook the interactive characteristics required to con-struct real -world applications. To address this limitation, Interaction2Code (Xiao et al., 2025) proposes to recover code from pre-interaction and post - interaction screenshots, and IWR-Bench (Chen et al., 2025) introduces recovering web pages from human -recorded interaction trajecto-ries. However, these tasks still rely on manually annotated trajectories, which increases annotation cost. Moreover, existing evaluations do not ex-amine the model’s ability to actively explore and obtain external feedback. Concurrently, WebVIA (Xu et al., 2025a) presents an agent model in which an exploration agent is responsible for exploring web content and a code - generation agent generates code based on the exploration results. Our work differs from We-bVIA in the following aspects: (1) In terms of task definition, our task’s ultimate goal is to replicate dashboards and does not emphasize a separation between exploration and code generation, whereas WebVIA still evaluates exploration and code gener-ation separately, and its code generation evaluation depends on human - selected screenshots; (2) Our domain focuses more specifically on dashboards and the diverse callback logical structures within dashboards; (3) We design a comprehensive set of automated evaluation metrics that are more tailored to the Dashboard2Code task. 

A.2 Comparison with existing benchmarks 

We compare our benchmark with existing related benchmarks in Table 5. 

A.3 Benchmark Construction Details A.3.1 Benchmark Filtering Principle 

• P1 (Interactive & dynamic). The dashboard must be interactive; its full behavior is re-vealed and verified only through interaction. • P2 (No animations or pop-ups). Exclude ani-mations, modal dialogs, and other non-instant response behaviors. • P3 (Reverse-engineerable & self-contained). 

The dashboard must not rely on unrepro-ducible external assets (e.g., audio/images) or data downloaded from external links, except for data that can be mocked and hard-coded. All relevant elements must be observable, and the code must be self-contained. • P4 (Unified framework). We restrict imple-mentations to a standard library set— dash ,

plotly , dash_bootstrap_components (dbc) , dash_daq , and dash_ag_grid —and avoid non-standard dependencies. • P5 (Realistic layout and visuals). The dash-board should have a realistic layout and ap-pearance without readability issues (e.g., oc-clusion/overlap). • P6 (Correct complexity labeling). Each sam-ple must match its assigned complexity sub-type. 

A.3.2 Definitions of Different Interactive Logics 

Level 1: Atomic (One-to-One). This level captures the minimal interaction unit: a single input com-ponent controls a single chart output through one callback function. It primarily tests basic under-standing of callback wiring and interaction syntax. 

Level 2: Star & Mesh Topology (Coupling & Aggregation). This level covers broadcasting and 

aggregation patterns. It includes one-to-many logic (one input updates multiple charts), many-to-one 

logic (multiple inputs jointly control one chart), and 

many-to-many coupled mesh structures. The main challenge is to disentangle interactions among vari-ables and correctly handle simultaneous updates .Name Task Domain # Samples Data Source                                 

> Design2Code UI-to-Code Web pages 484 Real websites Chart2Code Chart-to-Code Chart 2,023 -Plot2Code Chart-to-Code Chart 386 Matplotlib gallery ChartMimic Chart-to-Code Chart 4,800 ArXiv papers IWR-Bench Video-to-Code Web pages 113 Real websites Interaction2Code Images-to-Code Web pages 374 Github+C4 DashboardQA GUI Interactive QA Dashboard 112 Tableau Public DashboardMimic GUI Interactive-to-Code Dashboard 180 Dash gallery+LLM aug.

Table 5: Comparison of DashboardMimic with existing benchmarks. Design2Code focuses on generating code to reconstruct UI design. Plot2Code and ChartMimic focus on static chart-to-code, while IWRBench and Inter-action2Code reconstruct code from human-annotated interaction traces; DashboardQA first proposes dashboard question answering. In contrast, DashboardMimic evaluates Dashboard2Code, where a GUI agent actively interacts with a dashboard at runtime and generates code that reproduces it in both behavior and visual appearance. 

Level 3: Inter-dependent (State & Circularity). 

This level features long-range dependency chains and explicit state management. It includes chained callbacks , where the output of one callback updates another input component and thereby triggers sub-sequent callbacks; conditional visibility , where the presence or visibility of a control is dynamically toggled based on other controls or intermediate out-puts; state dependency , where an output depends not only on the currently triggered inputs but also on persistent state variables (e.g., stored selections) carried across interactions; and circular callbacks ,where two or more components mutually update each other, forming feedback loops that require careful handling to avoid inconsistent states. These behaviors cannot be understood by isolating indi-vidual inputs, and thus demand global state reason-ing .

A.3.3 LLM-based Data Augmentation Details 

We show the prompt for LLM-Based Data augmen-tation in Figure 17. 

A.3.4 Real-world Data License 

The 58 real-world seed samples in our benchmark come from dash-example-index, which is under MIT-License. 

A.3.5 Mitigating Data Contamination 

Given that our real-world seed data are sourced from open-source repositories, there is a potential risk that large-scale models have been exposed to these samples during pre-training. To rigorously mitigate this risk and ensure the benchmark eval-uates reasoning rather than memorization, we ap-plied a strict Rewrite-and-Refactor pipeline to all collected seed dashboards. As shown in our curation process, we employed a standardized LLM-based refactoring step guided by strict constraints to perturb the original code surface forms while preserving interaction logic: • Semantic Anonymization: We explicitly re-moved specific references to standard "toy datasets" (e.g., Iris, Titanic) that act as strong retrieval cues for LLMs. As per our cura-tion protocol, all specific proper nouns and dataset names were replaced with generic, domain-realistic equivalents (e.g., renaming “Iris Dataset” to “Botanical Dimensions Anal-ysis”) to prevent the model from recalling the code via keyword association. • Data Slicing and Component Normaliza-tion: To differentiate our samples from raw GitHub files, we enforced constraints on data density. This ensures that even if a model had seen the original implementation, the token se-quence in our benchmark differs significantly, forcing the model to rely on the current visual and DOM context rather than memory. These perturbation strategies ensure that Dash-boardMimic serves as a test of generalization capa-bility rather than a retrieval task. Furthermore, to assess the risk of data contam-ination quantitatively, we conducted a rigorous similarity analysis between the original real-world code and the corresponding refactored code. We considered both lexical overlap and embedding-level semantic similarity by adopting 5-gram and 3-gram Jaccard similarity, together with mean-centered cosine similarity, which mitigates embed-ding anisotropy. We further compared the true matched pairs (Original vs. Refactored) against a random baseline constructed by pairing each orig-inal sample with a randomly sampled dashboard. Metric Matched Random 5-gram Jaccard 0.1724 0.0102 3-gram Jaccard 0.2509 0.0270 MC Cosine 0.2069 0.0018 

Table 6: Similarity analysis between the original real-world code and the refactored code. “Matched” denotes similarity between each original sample and its corre-sponding refactored version, while “Random” denotes similarity between each original sample and a randomly sampled dashboard. We report lexical overlap using n-gram Jaccard similarity and semantic relatedness using mean-centered (MC) cosine similarity. The low Jaccard scores for matched pairs indicate substantial surface-form variation. The higher MC cosine similarity than the random baseline suggests that the underlying do-main logic is largely preserved. 

Component Count Prevalence (%) 

Dropdown 112 42.2 RadioItems 51 30.6 Slider 70 33.3 RangeSlider 28 20.0 Checklist 32 20.1 

Table 7: Prevalence of common interactive components in the benchmark. 

As shown in Table 6, the matched pairs exhibit only limited surface-form overlap, with 5-gram and 3-gram Jaccard scores of 0.1724 and 0.2509, respec-tively, suggesting that our refactoring pipeline sub-stantially alters the lexical realization of the code and thus reduces the likelihood of rote memoriza-tion. At the same time, the mean-centered cosine similarity remains markedly higher than that of the random baseline (0.2069 vs. 0.0018), indicating that the refactored code still preserves the core do-main logic of the original dashboard programs. 

A.3.6 Benchmark Statistics 

UI component statistics. As shown in Table 7, the top-5 UI components include the most widely used dashboard controls— Dropdown , RadioItems ,

Slider , RangeSlider , and Checklist —each with substantial prevalence. This design reflects real-world dashboard interaction patterns and en-sures broad coverage of common filtering and se-lection operations. 

Visualization type diversity. As shown in the Figure 6, the benchmark covers 20 common visual-ization types, with the categories represented in a relatively balanced manner. 

Interaction logic diversity. As shown in the Fig-ure 7, the benchmark covers 8 common dashboard 3.9%  

> 5.5%
> 9.8%
> 9.6%
> 8.3% 3.3%
> 4.2%
> 3.1%
> 4.2%
> 5.0%
> 4.8%
> 4.4%
> 4.8%
> 6.8%
> 5.5%
> 3.7% 3.7%
> 3.9%
> 2.6%
> 2.8%
> Visualization Type Distribution
> Chart Types
> scatter_3d
> histogram
> bar
> scatter
> scatter(line chart)
> imshow
> parallel_coordinates
> scatter_map
> scatter_matrix
> line_polar
> violin
> funnel
> pie
> area
> box
> bar_polar
> treemap
> sunburst
> scatter_polar
> parallel_categories

Figure 6: Visualization type distribution. Complexity L1  

> Complexity L2
> Complexity L3
> Atomic (One-to-One)
> BroadCasting (One-to-Many)
> Aggregation (Many-to-One)
> Coupled Mesh (Many-to-Many)
> Chained Callback State Dependency
> Conditioned Visibility
> Circular Callback

Figure 7: Visualization interaction logic distribution. 

interaction-logic types, grouped into 3 levels of complexity. Within each complexity level, the sub-types are distributed relatively well balanced. 

A.3.7 Discussion about other Dashboard Frameworks 

We also considered alternative dashboard frame-works, but found them less well aligned with Dashboard2Code. Proprietary BI systems such as Tableau and Looker do not provide a trans-parent, executable program target suitable for rig-orous code-level evaluation. React-based stacks, including Tailwind CSS and Material UI, are highly expressive, but they introduce substantial presentation-layer variability through component composition and utility-class styling. By compari-son, Plotly+Dash provides a more suitable abstrac-tion for our setting, as its Python-based, callback-driven design exposes dashboard logic more di-rectly and reduces interference from frontend pre-sentation details. A.4 Evaluation Framework Details A.4.1 Human Evaluation Processes and Guidelines 

To establish a rigorous ground truth for evalua-tion, we designed a streamlined front-end interface facilitating expert review. A panel of three grad-uate students majoring in computer science, each possessing extensive experience in data visualiza-tion, served as human evaluators. They assessed a diverse set of 90 dashboards generated by three distinct models (GPT-5.1, Gemini 3 Pro, Claude Sonnet 4.5), randomly sampled to ensure represen-tativeness. Evaluators scored each dashboard based on Vi-sual Fidelity and Functional Consistency . The final ground-truth score is derived from the average of these dimensions. To validate the reliability of our human annotations, we calculated the inter-annotator agreement. The evaluators demonstrated a strong consensus, achieving a Pearson correla-tion coefficient of 0.6525 , confirming the consis-tency of the subjective scoring process. We then analyzed the correlation between our automated metrics and these human judgments. As shown in Table 8, all proposed metrics show statisti-cally significant positive correlations ( p ≪ 0.001 ). Notably, our weighted combination metric achieves the highest alignment with human perception (Pear-son r = 0 .7807 , Spearman r = 0 .7173 ), demon-strating that our method serves as a robust proxy for human evaluation even under rigorous statistical testing. 

Visual Fidelity Scoring Guidelines The max-imum score for this aspect is 5 and the detailed scoring guidelines are as follows: - Score 5: Pixel-Perfect 

Almost identical to the original. Layout, com-ponent types, colors, font sizes, and spacing are nearly the same. Minor differences due to rendering engines are allowed. - Score 4: High Fidelity 

The overall look is very similar. Layout and component placement are correct. There are minor style differences (e.g., slight color dif-ferences in charts, font size slightly off) but they don’t affect the structure. - Score 3: Structural Match 

The structure is correct, but the appearance dif-fers. All charts and components are present, and the arrangement is correct. There are no-ticeable style issues (e.g., missing background color, misplaced legend, different point shapes in scatter plots). - Score 2: Component Error 

Layout or core components are incorrect. The general structure is maintained, but there are clear defects: 

– Incorrect chart type (e.g., bar chart changed to a line chart). 

– Missing key components (e.g., a drop-down menu is missing). 

– Layout misalignment (e.g., a two-column layout turned into a vertical ar-rangement). - Score 1: Severe Distortion 

Significant breakdown. Only minimal text or elements are retained, the interface is chaotic, elements overlap, or the interface contains er-ror messages or scrambled text. - Score 0: Irrelevant 

Completely irrelevant or blank. The generated interface is either blank or contains entirely in-correct content (e.g., drawing a picture results in a text box). 

Functional Consistency Scoring Guidelines 

The maximum score for this aspect is 5 and the detailed scoring guidelines are as follows: - Score 5: Behavior Match 

Logic and feedback are fully synchronized. The changes in the generated interface match the ground truth exactly. - Score 4: Logic Correct 

Core functionality is correct, but visual feed-back has minor flaws. 

– the data filtering logic is correct (e.g., trends update properly), but there are mi-nor issues with visual feedback. - Score 3: Partial Success 

Partial interaction failure. The main chart up-dates, but secondary information does not: 

– For example, clicking a point on the map updates the bar chart on the right, but the “Current Selected City: X” title does not change. Metric Pearson Spearman p-value                 

> Semantic 0.6165 0.5824 <0.0001 Figure Sim 0.6274 0.5719 <0.0001 LLM-Visual-Eval 0.6476 0.6387 <0.0001 LLM-Behavior-Eval 0.6671 0.6192 <0.0001
> Table 8: Correlation between different metrics and hu-man evaluation scores.

- Score 2: Wrong Logic 

The interaction responds, but the result is in-correct: 

– e.g. the task is “Highlight,” but it per-forms a “Filter” action, causing other data to disappear. - Score 1: No Response 

The interaction fails. After performing an ac-tion, there is no change in the interface (e.g., the screenshot remains static), indicating that the callback was not triggered or there is a bug in the code. - Score 0: Crash/Broken 

The interaction causes an error. After perform-ing an action, the chart disappears, becomes blank, or an error message such as a Python Traceback appears. 

A.4.2 Correlation between Human Evaluation and Automated Evaluation 

We show the correlations between human evalua-tion and each individual automatic evaluation met-ric in Table 8. To obtain the final metric, we follow the approach of IWR-Bench, using an optimiza-tion algorithm to derive weights that maximize the correlation between the final metric and human evaluations. As shown in Sec 4.4, we find that the optimal weights are generally uniform. The resulting Pearson correlation is 0.7807, and the Spearman correlation is 0.7173. In practice, in behavior-critical settings (interac-tion correctness/reliability) , users can up-weight task behavior metric/code-semantic metric while in visual-fidelity-critical settings up-weight visual similarity metrics (fig-sim/LLM-Visual-sim). We recommend always reporting sub-metrics to reflect the performance in different metrics. 

A.4.3 Robustness of LLM-as-judge 

To eliminate the potential bias caused by using a single LLM as a judge and the possible inflation of scores due to homogeneous models, we also use the GPT-5.1 model to evaluate the generation results of Gemini3-Pro as well as those of GPT-5.1 itself on all the samples of our benchmark. The experimental results are shown in Table 9. It can be observed that the scores for LLM-Visual-Eval and LLM-Behavior-Eval are nearly identical, and the scoring trends for LLM-Semantic-Eval are also very similar for both models. This demonstrates the robustness of our LLM-As-Judge approach. To mitigate the potential self-preference bias in-herent in single-model evaluations, we performed a cross-validation analysis using GPT-5.1 as an exter-nal judge. We evaluated the outputs of both Gemini 3 Pro and GPT-5.1, where all responses were gen-erated with the assistance of DOM information. As shown in Table 9, the evaluation metrics exhibit high consistency regardless of the judge model used. Specifically, the scores for LLM-Vis. and LLM-Behav. show minimal variance between the two evaluators. Although LLM-Sem. scores show slight fluctuations, the relative performance ranking between models remains unchanged. These results strongly validate the robustness and reliability of our LLM-as-Judge evaluation framework. 

A.4.4 Evaluation Task Annotation Details Annotation Principles. To ensure the tasks are both comprehensive and efficient, annotators fol-lowed three core principles: (1) Full Coverage ,ensuring every interactive component and its un-derlying callback functions are triggered at least once; (2) Visual Significance , which incorporates the equivalence partitioning method from black-box testing. For continuous controls (e.g., Sliders), annotators selected representative values that yield distinct visual state transitions rather than minor shifts, effectively grouping functionally equivalent inputs; and (3) Independence , where each task is designed to be atomic, starting from the initial state to avoid error propagation between test cases. This process resulted in a total of 450 high-quality interaction tasks. 

Quality Assurance. The quality of the in-structions was verified through a two-stage pro-cess. First, we conducted a “Golden-Run” where an automated agent executed all tasks on all the ground-truth dashboards. A 100% success rate was achieved, confirming the precision of the natu-ral language instructions. Second, we randomly sampled 100 dashboards generated by different models and ran the same workflow. When failures Generator Evaluator LLM Sem. LLM Vis. LLM Behav. 

Gemini 3 Pro Gemini 3 Flash 81.9 70.3 77.1 Gemini 3 Pro GPT-5.1 70.3 72.2 76.8 GPT-5.1 Gemini 3 Flash 61.4 62.0 50.9 GPT-5.1 GPT-5.1 53.8 62.1 52.1 

> Table 9: Robustness analysis of LLM-as-Judge with different evaluators. All models are provided with DOM information during generation. The first row in each group represents the standard evaluation setting, while the second uses GPT-5.1 as a cross-evaluator.

or mismatched outcomes occurred, we confirmed they were attributable to issues in the generated dashboards rather than errors in the annotation task specifications or evaluation procedure. Third, we cross-verified the instructions against the internal logic of the Python code to ensure that no hidden states or conditional callbacks were overlooked. We show the evaluation task annotation guide-lines in Figure 12 and show evaluation task exam-ples in Figure 19 and Figure 20. 

A.4.5 Figure Similarity Calculation Details Style. For each trace type, we collect the set of colors used by its traces. Following the color evalu-ation protocol in ChartMimic, we first match traces of the same type and then compute the L2 similarity between their color values. 

Data. For each trace type, we sort data points, align dimensions via interpolation, and compute the L2 similarity between the aligned data arrays. 

Type and Text. We extract trace types/names and textual objects directly from the JSON, and compute F1 scores for both. We aggregate the four sub-scores into a single metric: 

FigureSimilarity = 0 .3 Data + 0 .2 Style + 0 .2 Type + 0 .3 Text .

(6) 

A.4.6 Task Executor Implementation Details 

To facilitate dynamic interaction evaluation, we developed a robust Automated Task Executor that orchestrates headless browsers to perform natural language instructions using a multi-modal agent. This agent leverages a comprehensive observation space—comprising the accessibility tree, action history, and a distinctive dual-frame visual input (contrasting the previous and current screenshots) to verify action effects and automatically detect ex-ecution stalemates. We formalize all spatial inter-actions into a normalized [0 , 1000] coordinate sys-tem; empirically, we find that this strategy slightly enhances the spatial reasoning and task execution rates of the Gemini 3 Flash model. The frame-work operates in a high-concurrency environment, enforcing strict state isolation by resetting the dash-board between tasks to ensure reproducible evalua-tion. 

A.4.7 Related Prompts 

We show the prompt for LLM-Semantic-Eval in Figure 15, prompt for LLM-Visual-Eval in Fig-ure 13, prompt for LLM-Task-Behavior-Eval in Figure 14, prompt for task executor evaluation agent in Figure 16. 

A.5 Experimental Details A.5.1 Interaction Environment Details 

To evaluate the agent’s capability to explore and interact with dynamic dashboards, we engineered a lightweight, high-fidelity interaction environment. This environment is built upon Selenium Web-Driver integrated with Google Chrome, ensuring that the agent perceives the dashboard exactly as a human user would. 

Viewport & Coordinate System. We enforce a fixed viewport resolution of 1920 × 1080 pixels. This standardization ensures consistent visual feed-back across different models and runs, eliminating artifacts caused by responsive layout shifts. The coordinate system is mapped 1:1 to pixels, where 

(0 , 0) represents the top-left corner. 

Observation Space. At every time step t, the environment provides two modalities to the agent. The inclusion of structured text data is configurable based on the experimental setting: • Visual Feedback: A high-resolution screen-shot ( St) capturing the current state of the dashboard, including tooltips, hover states, and updated charts. • Structured Feedback (Optional): A simpli-fied, role-based accessibility list derived from our DOM extraction strategy (described later), which provides precise bounding box coordi-nates ( [x, y, w, h ]) for interactive elements. 

DOM Extraction & Abstraction Strategy We show the example DOM tree in Figure 10. Araw HTML DOM tree for a data-intensive dash-board is often prohibitively large and noisy. Plotly charts typically render thousands of SVG nodes (e.g., one <path> per data point), which can eas-ily overflow the context window of Multi-modal LLMs (MLLMs). Instead of using the raw DOM, we implemented a custom JavaScript-based Heuris-tic Extraction Strategy that filters and flattens the DOM into a concise list of actionable elements. We process the DOM via the following rules: • Noise Reduction. We aggressively prune in-ternal structures of complex widgets. For data tables (e.g., Dash DataTable, AgGrid), we ignore individual cells and headers, re-taining only the macro container. Similarly, internal SVG components of charts (e.g., 

modebar , rc-slider-mark ) and purely deco-rative wrappers are discarded. • Visibility & Interaction Filtering. We strictly filter out invisible elements based on CSS properties ( display , visibility ) and di-mensions ( width/height ≤ 0). Crucially, our extractor handles special cases for data visualization libraries (e.g., Plotly), where in-teractive layers often have opacity: 0 but 

pointer-events: auto .• Role Identification. Instead of generic HTML tags, we map elements to se-mantic roles relevant to dashboard inter-action. Based on class name heuris-tics, elements are categorized into roles such as chart_container , data_table ,

slider_container , dropdown_option , or 

axis_filter_track .• Output Format. The final output is not a tree, but a flat JSON list containing the element’s id, role, tag, and its bounding box [x, y, w, h ].This format reduces token usage by approxi-mately 95% while preserving essential spatial grounding information. 

A.5.2 Evaluation Setup Details 

We use an MM-React-style framework for evalua-tion. At each step, the multimodal model receives the current dashboard screenshot, optional DOM tree, historical screenshots, and actions as input. The model outputs its reasoning and selects an ac-tion from its action space. For all evaluations, we use default inference parameters for the models. We further use a resolution compression strategy to reduce overhead. To reduce overhead, we use a resolution of 

1920 × 1080 for the current screenshot, and low-resolution (compressed by a factor of 4) screen-shots for historical steps without retaining prior reasoning. We found that this compression does not affect the model’s final performance, as shown in Table 10. Possible actions include: Success: Outputs Done 

and generates the final code. Failure: Outputs 

Fail and abandons the task if the action is un-parseable. Interaction limit: The agent must stop when reaching the pre-defined interaction limit (25 in our evaluation setup). This scenario was not ob-served in our experiments. Interaction: Performs an action such as clicking or dragging. If an interaction is performed, the dashboard returns a new screenshot and optional DOM tree, which are appended to the model’s input for the next step. 

Agent Payload Details To facilitate long-horizon reasoning within context limits, we employ a con-figurable structured prompt payload. The payload consists of three distinct blocks: 1. System Instruction: A static definition of the agent’s role, action space (Click, Scroll, Drag, etc.), and strict JSON output format. 2. Conversation History (Context Compres-sion): A chronological log of previous turns. To optimize memory usage and enhance rea-soning reliability, we implement an optional Context Compression mechanism. When en-abled, screenshots in the user’s history mes-sages are resized to a lower resolution ( 480 ×

270 ) before being stored. 

Empirical Benefit: Our experiments indicate that this strategy serves a dual purpose: it reduces token consumption and, more impor-tantly, channels the model’s attention toward the current observation. By reducing the vi-sual saliency of past states, the agent is less prone to hallucinations derived from obsolete visual details, thereby improving interaction accuracy. 3. Current Observation: The active input for the current step t. This includes: • The High-Resolution screenshot ( 1920 ×

1080 ) to ensure fine-grained visual de-tails are legible for the immediate task. • (Optional) The extracted DOM list is in-jected as text into the user prompt, ex-plicitly informing the agent of the exact coordinates of valid interactive zones. 

Prompts and Examples We show the prompt for evaluation in Figure 11, the example for evaluation generation process in Figure 8 (Part I) and Figure 8 (Part II). 

A.6 More Experiments A.6.1 Ablation Study 

In this section we conduct ablation studies of our method. Results are shown in Table 10. 

Effect of Native Image Resolution (w/o Compres-sion). We modified the evaluation setup to use the native resolution for historical images, instead of applying the low-resolution compression. We observed a slight decrease in performance across various metrics when using Native image resolu-tion. This suggests that our compression strategy is appropriate and does not significantly impact the model’s performance on this task. 

Effect of Action Thinking Mode (w/o Thought). 

We removed the "thinking" step before the model outputs an action at each step of the evaluation, which led to a noticeable decline in performance. This demonstrates the importance of thoughtful reasoning at each step of exploration for better task performance. 

Effect of Using Only Initial Screenshot for Re-construction (w/o Interaction). To confirm that our benchmark indeed requires model interaction to fully reconstruct a dashboard, we tested the Gem-ini model’s ability to generate code with only the initial screenshot of the dashboard. We found a sig-nificant drop in performance across various metrics, indicating that interaction is necessary for accurate dashboard reconstruction. However, this perfor-mance decline is not catastrophic. We discovered that in some cases, the text information in certain dataset samples provided enough clues about the dashboard’s interaction logic. We did not remove or modify these samples, as we believe that infer-ring interaction logic based on text is also a model capability. The impact of text on model perfor-mance is further discussed in Sec 5.3.1. 

A.7 Text Anonymization Experiment Details 

We show the prompt for anonymize the text in the dash app in Figure 18. Note that the LLM is only allowed to modify the textual element in app.layout and keep all the others the same. After the process, we manually recheck each modified code to ensure that only the text in app.layout has changed. We show an anonymized example in Figure 9. We observed that Gemini3-Pro exhibits identical exploration paths on both anonymized and non-anonymized dashboards (as shown in (b)). How-ever, as depicted in (c), the model is only able to accurately reconstruct the interaction logic on the non-anonymized dashboard. This suggests that the model may rely heavily on textual cues, rather than truly understanding and replicating the underlying interaction logic. 

A.8 Benchmark Cases 

Figures 21 through 28 illustrate the spectrum of interaction complexity implemented in our bench-mark, progressing from simple atomic updates to complex conditional and circular dependencies. 

A.9 Error Cases of SOTA model A.9.1 Presentation dimension - Presentation Mismatch (Styling & Layout Deviations) 

As illustrated in Figure 29, our benchmark captures nuanced failures in the reverse-engineering process. A representative case is the Type II error (Presen-tation Mismatch), where the model successfully reconstructs the dashboard’s interactive logic but fails to adhere to its aesthetic specifications. Specif-ically, comparing the ground truth (Figure 29a) with the model’s output (Figure 29b), we observe a shift from a compact sidebar layout to a vertically stacked arrangement, alongside deviations in CSS styling, which significantly impacts visual similar-ity without compromising core functional utility. 

A.9.2 Logical dimension - Missing Interactive Components 

As demonstrated in Figure 30, Type III errors rep-resent a failure in State Exploration and Content Model Code Exec. Task Exec. Comp. Cov. LLM Sem. LLM Behav.                     

> Gemini 3 Pro 97.78 94.17 91.60 81.89 77.10 Gemini 3 Pro (w/o Thought) 90.00 85.30 85.22 72.22 65.80 Gemini 3 Pro (w/o Compression) 93.89 90.77 88.12 76.78 69.90 Gemini 3 Pro (w/o Interaction) 95.56 82.82 87.43 73.67 62.00
> Table 10: Ablation experiment results on Gemini 3 Pro with DOM under different conditions.

Discovery. In this scenario, unlike Type II (where the vi-sual style is wrong) or Type V (where the logic is hallucinated), the model successfully reconstructs the interactive skeleton—the tabs are functional and the view switches. However, the agent fails to replicate the target content associated with the secondary state. As seen in (d), the complex visualization re-quired for "World Indicators" is replaced by a hallu-cinated placeholder ("Additional global metrics..."). This suggests that during the reverse-engineering process, the agent failed to successfully traverse or scrape the specific DOM state of the target dash-board’s second tab. Consequently, while the UI component exists, the critical data visualization component is missing entirely. 

A.9.3 Logical dimension - State Misinterpretation (Broken Dependency) 

As illustrated in Figure 31, Type IV errors charac-terize instances where the model identifies compo-nents but misinterprets the causal graph between inputs and outputs. While the generated dash-board successfully captures the primary interac-tion—updating the "Crop Type" to "Corn" and mod-ifying the chart title—it exhibits an edge alignment failure regarding dependent variables. Specifi-cally, the interaction fails to trigger the neces-sary downstream updates: the bar chart retains the "Wheat" data distribution (contrast d with b), and the "Growth Stage" dropdown fails to synchronize with the new crop type. This disconnect suggests the agent treats coupled variables as independent, severing the link between the control trigger and the data visualization layer. 

A.9.4 Logical dimension - Transformation Hallucination 

As shown in Figure 32, Type V errors (Transfor-mation Hallucination) manifest as a deficit in fine-grained numerical reasoning and logic replication. In this scenario, the model successfully identifies the interactive affordance and establishes the causal link between the "Cluster Beta" radio button and the chart update. However, a semantic gap occurs in the execution of the callback logic. While the ground truth (b) implies a specific data transformation—applying a conditional filter for "Critical" status and updating the visual encod-ing to red—the generated dashboard (d) executes a generic or incorrect update. This results in a "hallucination" where the UI remains interactive and responsive, but the presented data is factually inconsistent with the intended logic, thereby com-promising data integrity. (a) The agent begins by identifying interactive UI components within the "Regional Wind Pattern Analysis" dashboard. In Step 1, it performs a targeted click on the ’Select Polar Chart Type’ dropdown to reveal the available data visualization modes, identifying two options: ’Bar Polar’ and ’Line Polar’. In Step 2, the agent selects the ’Line Polar’ option to trigger a state change, observing how the visual encoding shifts from radial bars to interconnected data points. This sequence allows the model to map the relationship between the dropdown controller and the rendering logic of the polar coordinate system. 

Figure 8: Generation cases (Part I) (b) The agent shifts focus to data filtering mechanisms and final requirement gathering. In Step 3, it interacts with the ’Filter Wind Intensity Range’ slider by dragging the left handle, observing real-time updates to the chart to confirm that the range slider dynamically filters the wind strength datasets. Finally, in Step 4, the agent synthesizes its findings, identifying the complete application stack: a title/description header, a range-based slider (0 to >6), a dual-mode dropdown, and a wind rose polar graph. Having mapped the data structure (strength bins and directional vectors) and the interaction logic, the agent concludes the exploration phase, ready for code replication. 

Figure 8: Generation cases (Part II) Anonymize 

(a) Anonymize example 

(b) Gemini-Pro Exploration Trace 

(c) Gemini3-Pro 

Generated Code (w/o 

anonymize) 

(c) Gemini3-Pro 

Generated Code (with 

anonymize) 

.... 

@app.callback() 

def update_graph(width): 

# Create the scatter 

plot 

fig = px.scatter( 

df, 

x='bill_amount', 

y='gratuity', 

width=width, 

# Dynamic width based 

on slider 

height=400, 

template='plotly' 

)

... 

... 

@app.callback() 

def update_graph(n_points): 

df_subset = 

df_pool.iloc[:int(n_points 

* 0.15)] 

fig = px.scatter( 

df_subset, 

x='bill_amount', 

y='gratuity', 

)

... Figure 9: Text anonymize example. Comparison: Visual View vs. Pruned DOM 

1. Visual View (Screenshot Crop) 

2. Pruned DOM Representation (Input to Agent) 

[{"box": [337, 349, 366, 14], "id": 0, "role": "slider_container" }, {"box": [330, 349, 14, 14], "id": 1, "role": "slider_handle" }, {"box": [696, 349, 14, 14], "id": 2, "role": "slider_handle" }, {"box": [312, 444, 416, 36], "id": 3, "role": "dropdown_container" }, {"box": [312, 444, 416, 36], "id": 4, "role": "dropdown_input" }, {"box": [752, 85, 856, 450], "id": 5, "role": "chart_container" }]

Figure 10: Visualizing the DOM Pruning Strategy. While the visual view (Top) shows complex data points, the Pruned DOM (Bottom) abstracts the chart into a single container while preserving precise coordinates for the interactive dropdown and button. System Instruction for Interactive Dashboard Reconstruction Agent 

# Role 

You are an expert Python developer reverse-engineering Plotly Dash apps. Your goal: Explore a live dashboard screenshot (1920x1080) and generate the exact Python code to recreate it. 

# Environment & Rules 

- Viewport: 1920x1080 (0,0 is Top-Left). - Coordinate System: - x-axis: Horizontal position (0 at left, 1919 at right). - y-axis: Vertical position (0 at top, 1079 at bottom). - Max Steps: 25. - Single Action: Output EXACTLY ONE action per turn. - Process: Explore components to reveal data/states before generating code. - Output: A single JSON object. No conversational text. 

# Action Space 

You must output EXACTLY ONE action per turn from the list below: 1. click : Trigger a primary mouse click at a specific coordinate. Params: {"x": int, "y": int} 

2. double_click : Trigger a double-click event. Params: {"x": int, "y": int} 

3. move_mouse_to : Move mouse to a specific coordinate. Params: {"x": int, "y": int} 

4. scroll : Perform a vertical scroll action. If x/y are provided, moves mouse there first. Params: {"amount": int, "x": int (optional), "y": int (optional)} (-up, +down) 5. drag : Perform a click-and-drag operation from start to end coordinates. Params: {"from_x": int, "from_y": int, "to_x": int, "to_y": int} 

6. replace_text : Click at a coordinate, select all existing text (Ctrl+A), and type new text. Params: {"x": int, "y": int, "text": str} 

7. mark : visually mark a coordinate for reference in the next step. Params: {"x": int, "y": int} 

8. DONE : Exploration finished. Params: None. (Requires code field) 9. FAIL : Cannot proceed. Params: None. 

# Response Format (Strict JSON) 

Respond ONLY with a single JSON object. Do not include any explanations or conversational text. 

State 1: Exploration 

{"thought": "Brief reasoning. What element am I testing?", "action": { "type": "click", "x": 500, "y": 300 }, "code": null }

State 2: Generation (When action is DONE) 

{"thought": "I have identified all components. Generating code.", "action": { "type": "DONE" }, "code": "import plotly...from dash import...Full runnable code here" }

# Technical Stack & Constraints (STRICT) 

Replicate the dashboard exactly using ONLY these libraries: 1. Layout & UI: dash_bootstrap_components as dbc , dash_daq as daq , dash_ag_grid as dag .- Forbidden: Do NOT use dash_mantine_components .- Constraint: ALL figures MUST be wrapped in dcc.Graph components. 2. Core Dash: dash (html, dcc, Input, Output, State, ctx, MATCH, ALL). 3. Plotly: plotly.graph_objects as go , plotly.express as px .4. Others: pandas , numpy , json , math , datetime , random .5. Data Strategy: 

- You do NOT have access to the backend data. - You MUST generate synthetic data using pandas /numpy that visually matches the charts. 6. Initial State Fidelity: Ensure input components and Graph views are initialized with the EXACT values shown in the original screenshot. 

### GOAL & STRATEGY 

1. Explore Thoroughly: You should interact with components (e.g. Open the dropdown) to reveal ANY hidden states 

before coding. 2. High-Fidelity Replication: Your generated code must strictly match the screenshot. The generated code MUST implement the interactive logic (Callbacks) and Data Trend Fidelity. 

Figure 11: System Instruction for Interactive Dashboard Reconstruction Agent. Task Annotation Guidance 

# Interaction Selection Principles 

1. Selection Components: For Dropdowns , RadioItems , or Checkboxes , select significant non-default values that trigger visible changes. 2. Continuous Controls: For Sliders or Numeric Inputs , do not create multiple tasks for different values. Set a single value that covers the majority of the data distribution. 3. Prioritize "Trigger" Components: Focus on interactions with Buttons , Tabs , and master control panels over minor aesthetic filters. 

# Task Annotation Strategy 

4. Minimalism: Annotate the minimum number of tasks (typically 1 to 5) required to verify all unique interactive logic paths. Avoid redundant testing of similar functional units. 5. Imperative Phrasing: Use the imperative mood for instructions (e.g., "Click...", "Select..."). Do not include explanations of purpose or expected outcomes. 6. Independence: Ensure all tasks are atomized and independent. There must be no sequential or temporal dependencies between tasks. 7. Initial State Assumption: Assume each task begins from the application’s default initial state. Do not generate tasks that reset a component to its default value. 

# Constraint Checklist for Reproducibility 

8. Meaningful Impact: Verify if every task is essential for a specific callback or state change. 9. Value Diversity: Remove redundant tasks with different data values but identical logic. 10. Explicitness: Ensure descriptions are reproducible (e.g., Use "Select the second row" instead of "Pick a row"; use "Set range to [0.5, 1.0]" instead of "Set a narrow range"). 11. Efficiency: Ensure the task can be completed within a maximum of 5 interaction steps. 

Figure 12: Task Annotation Guidance for the Interactive Evaluation Framework. Visual Fidelity Evaluation Prompt 

You are an expert UI judge evaluating the fidelity of a Generated Dashboard Screenshot (GEN) against a Ground Truth Dashboard screenshot (GT). Your goal is to assess how well the generated screenshot specifically recreated the visual appearance of the ground truth screenshot. Image 1: Ground Truth (GT) Image 2: Generated (GEN) Please evaluate the GEN image based on the following specific criteria. 

Ignore minor differences in window size or exact axis tick values, as rendering engines may vary. ### Scoring Criteria: 

1. Layout & Components (0-20) : Are all figures and interactive components present? Does the arrangement match the GT image? 2. Chart Types (0-20) : Are all chart types correct (e.g., Bar vs Line vs Scatter)? 3. Text Content (0-10) : Do the Main Titles, Axis Titles, Legend Texts and Annotations match? 4. Data & Grouping (0-20) : Do the data trends look identical? Is the number of bars/lines/groups the same? 5. Style & Aesthetics (0-20) : Does the GEN match the GT in terms of colors, marker types, legends, grids, and backgrounds? 6. Clarity (0-10) : Is the layout clean? Are there any overlapping elements or broken CSS? 

### Output Format: 

Return a JSON object with specific scores and specific comments for each dimension. 

{"layout_score": int, "layout_comment": "string", "chart_type_score": int, "chart_type_comment": "string", "text_content_score": int, "text_content_comment": "string", "data_fidelity_score": int, "data_fidelity_comment": "string", "style_score": int, "style_comment": "string", "clarity_score": int, "clarity_comment": "string" }

Figure 13: Visual Fidelity Evaluation Prompt for generated dashboard assessment. Dynamic Behavior Evaluation Prompt 

Evaluate if the Generated Dashboard (GEN) behaves exactly like the Ground Truth (GT) for the user task: “{task_description}”. Images provided in order: 1. GT Start (Before Task) 2. GT End (After Task) 3. GEN Start (Before Task) 4. GEN End (After Task) 

Your task : Compare the CHANGES from Image 1 →2 (GT Delta) with the CHANGES from Image 3 →4 (GEN Delta). 

Focus ONLY on behavior consistency: 

• Did the same data values change in both? • Did the same visual elements get highlighted/updated? • Did the same controls respond to the interaction? • Did the dashboard update in the expected way? 

Do NOT evaluate: 

• Overall visual quality (handled separately) • Layout integrity (handled separately) • Style matching (handled separately) Rate ONLY the dynamic behavior consistency on 0-10: • 10 : Perfect behavior match, GEN responds exactly like GT • 7-9 : Very similar behavior with minor differences • 4-6 : Correct general direction but noticeable differences • 1-3 : Behavior differs significantly • 0: No behavior change or completely wrong response 

Output JSON format only: 

{"dynamic_behavior_consistency_score": int (0-10), "reasoning": "brief explanation focusing on behavior changes" }

Figure 14: Dynamic Behavior Evaluation Prompt for interaction assessment. System Instruction for LLM-Semantic-Eval 

You are a Senior Python Code Reviewer specializing in Plotly Dash applications. Your task is to compare "Generated Code" against "Ground Truth Code" to evaluate their Functional Equivalence .

### Goal 

Determine if the Generated Code implements the same interactive logic and data visualization behavior as the Ground Truth. 

Do not obsess over variable names or comment styles. Focus on the semantic logic of app.layout and @app.callback .

### Ground Truth Code: 

{code_gt} 

### Generated Code: 

{code_gen} 

### Evaluation Criteria 

Analyze the code based on two dimensions: 1. Layout Structure : Are the component hierarchies (Divs, Graphs, Buttons) semantically identical? 2. Callback Logic : Do the callbacks listen to the same Inputs, update the same Outputs, and perform equivalent data transformations? 

### Scoring Rubric 

• "Functional Equivalent" (Score: 100) : Logically identical. Produces exact same UI and handles interactions correctly. • "Minor Discrepancy" (Score: 80) : Mostly correct. Minor issues like default values or style parameters. • "Moderate Discrepancy" (Score: 60) : Core logic present, but noticeable gaps (e.g., secondary filter ignored). • "Significant Defect" (Score: 40) : UI exists, but interactive logic (Callbacks) has major flaws or errors. • "Critical Defect" (Score: 20) : Fails significantly. Missing key components; callbacks are hallucinated. • "Mismatch" (Score: 0) : Syntactically broken, irrelevant, or empty. 

### Output Format 

You must respond with a SINGLE JSON object: 

{"reasoning": "Step-by-step analysis of Layout and Callbacks...", "category": "Functional Equivalent", "score": 100 }

Figure 15: LLM-Semantic-Eval Prompt for functional consistency check. System Instruction for Task Executor Agent 

You are an expert UI Automation Agent for benchmarking Plotly Dash applications. Your goal is to execute a specific User Task on the current screen. 

# Input format 

1. User Task : The natural language instruction. 2. Action History : A list of actions you have executed in the current session so far. 3. Screenshots : Previous Screen and Current Screen. 4. Accessibility Tree : DOM structure. 

IMPORTANT : The bounding box within is formalized as [ymin, xmin, ymax, xmax] and normalized to 0-1000 .

# Action Space (Coordinates are normalized 0-1000) 

1. "click": {"type": "click", "x": int, "y": int} - Trigger a primary mouse click. 2. "double_click": {"type": "double_click", "x": int, "y": int} - Trigger a double-click event. 3. "move_mouse_to": {"type": "move_mouse_to", "x": int, "y": int} - Move mouse to coordinate. 4. "scroll": {"type": "scroll", "amount": int, "x": int, "y": int} - Perform vertical scroll. 5. "drag": {"type": "drag", "from_x": int, "from_y": int, "to_x": int, "to_y": int} - Drag action. 6. "replace_text": {"type": "replace_text", "x": int, "y": int, "text": str} - Select all and type. 7. "DONE": {"type": "DONE"} - Use ONLY when task is fully completed visually. 8. "FAIL": {"type": "FAIL", "reason": "str"} - The task is impossible to complete. 9. "RESET": {"type": "RESET", "reason": "str"} - Request a page reload. 

# Response Format 

Respond ONLY with a single JSON object. Do not include any explanations. 

Example 1: Click (Center of screen) 

{ "type": "click", "x": 500, "y": 500 } 

# Rules 

- Output strict JSON only. - Verification : Compare ’Previous Screen’ and ’Current Screen’. - Progress Tracking : Check Action History to avoid repeating steps. - Zero Guessing : ONLY generate an action if the target is visible or in the Tree. - Coordinate System : All input and output coordinates must be 0-1000. - Stalemate Detection : If actions don’t change the screen, consider returning "FAIL". - Confident Termination : Return "FAIL" if the dashboard is broken; do not try to fix it. 

Figure 16: System Instruction for Task Executor Agent. 

System Instruction for Data Generator Agent 

system_prompt = f""" You are a Python Dash expert generating a benchmark dataset. Your goal is to generate a fully functional, self-contained Dash app. 

**Constraints:** 

1. Libraries: dash , plotly , pandas . Optional: dash_bootstrap_components , dash_daq , dash_ag_grid .2. Data: Generate dummy data inside the code using pandas. Do not load external files. 3. Execution: The code must be runnable as a single script. 4. Style: {theme_instruction} 5. Viewport: The entire dashboard layout should fit within a single view on a 1920x1080 screen. 

**Task Specifications:** 

- Domain: {selected_domain} - Complexity Level: {level_name} 

**Available Candidates:** 

- Candidate Components: {’, ’.join(selected_components)} - Candidate Charts: {’, ’.join(selected_charts)} 

**Callback Logic Requirement (CRITICAL):** 

{callback_instruction} 

**Creative & Realism Guidelines:** 

1. Selection Strategy: Pick AT MOST 1-2 components/charts that make sense for the story. Less is More (Critical!!!) .2. Micro-Narrative: Invent a specific user story (e.g., "Analyzing Q3 Churn Rate"). 3. Data Strategy: - DROPDOWN LIMIT: Max 8 options. - Use trends/clusters instead of random noise (fixed seed 42). -

Avoid External Data: No px.data , read_csv , or URLs. - Control data points (~10 per figure) to avoid clutter. 

Figure 17: Data Generator Prompt with Embedded Testing Guidelines. Prompt for Anonymize the text in dash app layout. 

You are given a piece of Dash app code. Please modify the code as per the following requirements and output the complete code: A. For all the UI components on ‘app.layout‘, anonymize the labels (the content actually displayed in the UI) and corresponding titles. The anonymized text should be generic and have no business-specific meaning, such as ‘Dropdown1‘, ‘Title1‘, etc. Ensure that the components do not reveal any specific interaction logic. B. For all the text components on ‘app.layout‘ (including titles, descriptions, hints, etc.), also anonymize them and change them to generic names like ‘Title1‘, ‘Text1‘, etc., while maintaining UI readability. C. Additionally, please meet the following extra requirements: • * For dropdown menus, anonymize their title text, and render the options in the dashboard as ‘Option1‘, ‘Option2‘, ‘Option3‘, and so on. • * For sliders or range sliders, anonymize their title text, and avoid displaying the scale content explicitly in the rendered dashboard. • * For radio items or checklists, anonymize their title text, and also anonymize their option content. Notes: 1. Do not modify the code logic, variable names, callback functions, chart contents, or data processing parts. 2. Only modify the displayed text in the layout to anonymized labels. 3. The anonymized text should be meaningful (not empty), but should be as generic as possible so that it’s hard to infer any specific functionality or logic from the text. Here is the code: {python code} 

Figure 18: Prompt for Anonymize the text in dash app layout. 

(a) Initial state (b) Open dropdown (c) Select ‘Customer Growth‘ 

Figure 19: Example of a deterministic test trajectory for the Sales Performance dashboard. The task consists of: (1) opening the performance-metric-dropdown to display available options, and (2) selecting Customer Growth, resulting in updated bar chart colors and values. (a) Initial state (b) Select ‘Exponential‘ in ‘dist-dropdown‘      

> (c) Select ‘Empirical Sampling‘ in ‘mode-dropdown‘
> (d) Select ‘Empirical Sampling‘ then ‘Exponential‘
> (e) Drag ‘Mean ( μ)‘ to value 5 (f) Drag ‘Std Dev ( σ)‘ to value 2

Figure 20: Experimental trajectory for the Statistical Distribution Explorer. The sequence demonstrates (a) initial default settings, (b-d) switching between theoretical and empirical analysis for Gaussian and Exponential distributions, and (e-f) dynamic adjustment of normal distribution parameters via sliders.      

> (a) Position at x= 3 (b) Position at x= 5 .5

Figure 21: Level 1 (Atomic) Complexity Example. The application demonstrates a 1-to-1 interaction where (a) the vertical reference line is positioned at x = 3 , and (b) is updated to x = 5 .5 via a single slider input and a single callback function.  

> (a) Initial state (North Array) (b) Broadcasting interaction

Figure 22: Level 2 (Broadcasting) Complexity Example. The application demonstrates a 1-to-Many interaction pattern where a single "Global Controller" (the dcc.Dropdown for Turbine Array selection) simultaneously updates two distinct visual outputs: a polar bar chart and a directional scatter plot. This tests the agent’s ability to manage multiple output callbacks triggered by a single input change. (a) Initial state (Bar Polar) (b) Chart type interaction (c) Combined range filter 

Figure 23: Level 2 (Aggregation) Complexity Example. The application demonstrates a Many-to-1 interaction pattern where multiple independent inputs—a Range Slider for wind intensity and a Dropdown for chart type—jointly update a single visual output. This configuration tests the agent’s ability to handle multi-input synchronization and conditional rendering within a single callback function.   

> (a) Baseline (15% Discount) (b) Scaling Input A (40% Discount) (c) Filtering Input B (Timeframe)

Figure 24: Level 2 (Coupled Mesh) Complexity Example. This dashboard demonstrates a Many-to-Many interaction pattern where at least two independent inputs—Promotion Discount Level and Analysis Timeframe—jointly update at least two distinct visual outputs (Revenue Trend and Foot Traffic). This setup evaluates the agent’s proficiency in managing complex state dependencies where multiple triggers affect the global state of multiple components simultaneously.  

> (a) Initial state: Farm ’Alpha’ selected (b) Chained update: Farm ’Beta’ selected

Figure 25: Level 3 (Chained Callbacks) Complexity Example. The application demonstrates inter-dependent input components where the options in the ’Turbine ID’ dropdown are dynamically filtered based on the ’Wind Farm’ selection. Figure (b) specifically shows the active interaction where selecting a new farm triggers a callback to update child component values, illustrating a multi-step dependency chain that the agent must resolve to ensure data consistency across the UI. (a) Single Mode (Compare Off) (b) Comparison Mode (Compare On) 

Figure 26: Level 3 (Conditional Visibility & State) Complexity Example. The application implements a toggle-based conditional visibility pattern: when ’Compare Mode’ is deactivated (a), the secondary input is disabled and the output displays a single metric set. Activating the toggle (b) dynamically enables the ’Secondary Campaign’ dropdown and triggers a multi-trace update on both the radar chart and the data table. This requires the agent to handle component ’disabled’ states and conditional data merging logic.  

> (a) Risk Radar View with specific state (b) Project Flow View with shared state

Figure 27: Level 3 (State Dependency) Complexity Example. The dashboard implements a state-managed logic chain where visualizations are decoupled from immediate inputs. Changes to filters and themes are captured as "States" and only applied to the UI upon the "REFRESH VISUALS" trigger. This requires the agent to manage a global state across conditional chart schemas (Radar and Sankey) rather than responding to isolated input changes.       

> (a) Baseline: 2000m / 6561.7ft (b) Update Meters →Feet (c) Update Feet →Meters

Figure 28: Level 3 (Circular Callback) Complexity Example. This survey application implements synchronized dual-unit inputs for volcano elevation filtering. The logic features a circular dependency where an update to the ’Meters’ input (b) automatically recalculates and populates the ’Feet’ field, and vice versa (c). This evaluates the agent’s ability to implement bi-directional state synchronization without triggering infinite loops, while simultaneously filtering the geographic map output. (a) Ground Truth (b) Model Generation 

Figure 29: Example of Type II Error: Presentation Mismatch. While the generated dashboard (b) maintains functional parity with the ground truth (a), it exhibits significant aesthetic deviations in layout (horizontal vs. vertical component stacking) and styling, illustrating a failure in visual fidelity despite logical correctness.   

> (a) Ground Truth: State A (b) Ground Truth: State B
> (c) Generated: State A (d) Generated: State B (Content Discovery Failure)

Figure 30: Example of Type III Error: Missing Interactive Components (Content Discovery Failure). Here, the model correctly identifies the presence of the Tab component and even replicates the switching mechanism (the header updates in d). However, it fails to populate the content for the World Indicators state. Instead of the complex bubble chart seen in the Ground Truth (b), the model generates a generic placeholder. This indicates a failure in the exploration phase: the agent likely failed to traverse and scrape the DOM state associated with the second tab, resulting in an empty shell. (a) Ground Truth: State A (Wheat) (b) Ground Truth: State B (Corn)  

> (c) Generated: State A (Wheat) (d) Generated: State B (Broken Dependency)

Figure 31: Example of Type IV: State Misinterpretation (Broken Dependency). In the Ground Truth transition (a →

b), switching the crop type triggers a cascade update: the chart data shifts significantly, and the secondary dropdown updates to ‘Emergence’. The generated model (d) correctly updates the widget label and chart title to ‘Corn’ but fails to execute the underlying data propagation, leaving the bar chart values and the ‘Growth Stage’ dropdown stuck in the previous ‘Wheat’ state. (a) Ground Truth: Cluster Alpha (Normal) (b) Ground Truth: Cluster Beta (Critical)  

> (c) Generated: Cluster Alpha (d) Generated: Transformation Hallucination

Figure 32: Example of Type V Error: Data Integrity Failure. Due to the limited size of the RadioButtons , the model fails to trigger the state transition to Cluster Beta during exploration. Consequently, while the generated dashboard (d) maintains a functional UI skeleton, it fails to reproduce the correct data transformation logic (e.g., color shifting to red and critical threshold scaling), resulting in a logical hallucination where the second state is merely a functional replica of the first.